{% include lib/mathjax.html %}
# Joost's Updates on 499
This is a beginning accumulation of new things I am excited to learn about & share about during my research with Dr. Ravi Sheth. It can be broadly separated in the following categories:

```
- Theory
- Code
- Results
```


# Theory
## Cosmology I: Formation
### Structure Formation
Our universe has some fascinating properties behind it. 
In cosmology, structures originate due to pertubations in a homogenous and isotropic (=same everywhere) universe. Perturbations grow due to if they are heavier than a mass or scale a la the Jean's length, at which gravity is no longer able to overcome pressure differences.

After the Big Bang, the universe had a large scale structure with overdensities of matter. These overdensities started to coalesce, forming sheets, then filaments, then haloes. Some of these haloes formed early galaxies, and some of these haloes collapsed under their own mass. In this process, they virialize. 

Most early models assume the Universe had two energy components: ordinary baryonic matter and radiation (photons from the cosmic microwave background radiation) and relativistic neutrinos. Two approaches to perturbations are involved: one is adiabatic and one is isothermal initial conditions. Adiabitic refers to having all matter and radiation fields being perturbed such that the total density varies, but the ratio of photons-baryons is the same throughout space. Isothermal refers to pertubations in the initial ratio of baryons-components but with no spatial variation w.r.t to the photons-baryons. In simple models, however, inflation, due to quantum fluctuations of the inflaton scalar field, predicts adiabatic perturbations and a Gaussian initial density field. To be specific, should the density $$\delta << 1$$, this is considered linear evolution where linear perturbation is at play but where the density is $$\delta > 1$$, non-linear evolution occurs whereby mode coupling happens disrupting the independence of the gaussian fields.

### Nonlinear evolution
In 1970, Zel'dovich gave an analytical approximation to describe the initial non-linear collapse of a perturbation of a cosmic density field. This is to piece the dots why we have nonlinear strucutres today due to initial perturbations. In 1972, Gunn & Gott showed a simple spherically symmetric model to show the growth, turn-around, collapse, and virialization of a perturbation.
When a halo collapses, it is also likely to gain angular momentum from the tidal torques of neighboring haloes. These torques appera through gravitational torques as pancakes but also oblique shocks generated by their own collapse. An open question is accounting for rotation in these models. 
How this shape deforms is structured by the following equation:
$$p(r,t)=\frac{P_o(t)}{(1-b(t)\lambda_1(q)(1-b(t)\lambda_2(q)(1-b(t)\lambda_3(q)}$$
Should $$\lambda_1 = \lambda_2 = \lambda_3$$ then spherical symmetric collapse occurs as opposed to ellipsoidal collapse occurs if there is a $$\lambda_1 > \lambda_2 > \lambda_3$$. 

### Interesting Padwanabhan Problem:

A physical quantity f(t,x) - which could be, for example, $$\delta(t,x)$$ or $$v(t,x)$$ -- evolves in time in accordance with some differential equation. To determine any such quantity at time t, we need to know its exact space dependence at some initial instant t=t_i (e.g. to determine $$\delta(t,x)$$ we need to know $$\delta(t_i,x)$$. Often, we are not interested in the exact form of \delta(t,x), but only its "statistical properties" in the following sense. We may assume that for sufficiently small t_i, each Fourier mode $$\delta_k(t_i)$$ was a Gaussian random varialbe with:

$$\left\langle \delta_\mathbf{k}(t_i)\delta_\mathbf{p}^*(t_i) \right\rangle = (2\pi)^3P(\mathbf{k},t_i)\delta_{dirac}(\mathbf{k}-\mathbf{p})$$ where $$P(\mathbf{k},t_i)$$ is the power spectrum of $$\delta(t_i,x)$$ and $$\left\langle .... \right\rangle$$ is the ensemble average. 

The Gaussian nature of $$\delta_k$$ cannot be maintained for $$t>t_i$$ if the evolution couples the modes for different values of $$\textbf{k}$$. 

The density $$p(x,t)$$ due to a set of point particles, each of mass m, is given by: $$p(x,t) = \frac{m}{a^3(t)}\Sum{\delta_{Dirac}(x-x_i(t))}{i}.$$ The density contrast $$\delta(x,t)$$ is related to the density $$\ro(x,t)$$ by:

$$1+\delta(x,t) = \frac{\ro(x,t)}{\ro_b} = \frac{m}{\ro_b a^3} \Sum{\delta_{Dirac}(x-x_1) = \frac{mV}{M}\Sum{\delta_{Dirac}(x-x_1)$$

Taking the fourier transform of both sides and negating the $$k=0$$ mode:

$$\delta_k(t) = \int d^{3}x \times V \times exp(ikx)\delta(x,t) = \frac{1}{N} \Sum{exp ikx_i(t)}$$

Differentianting this expression, there is:
$$\dot{\delta_k(t)} = \frac{1}{N} \Sum{(ik\dot{x}_j exp ikx_j}{j} $$ and
$$\ddot{\delta_k(t)} = \frac{1}{N} \Sum{[(ik\ddot{x}_j -(k\dot{x}_j)^2]exp ikx_j}{j}$$

We have also that $$\"{x}_i + 2\frac{\dot{a}}{a}\dot{x_i} = -\frac{1}{a^2}\nabla_x\phi$$

Using the above to eliminate $$\ddot{x}_j$$, one gets an equation for $$\delta_k(t)$$:
$$\ddot{\delta_i} + 2\frac{\dot{a}}{a}\dot{\delta_i} = -\frac{1}{N}\sum{\frac{ik\nabla\phi_j}{a^2}} - B$$ where $$B = \frac{1}{N}\sum{\frac{m}{M}(k\dot{x}_j)^2exp(ikx_j}$$
We have here for that the modes for different values of k mix with each other as $$ t >t_i$$ due to the B term; should $$\delta(t,x)<<1$$ then the evolution is described by $$\delta(t,x)$$ by linear perturbation theory. This in effect becomes: $$\delta_k(t) = T_k(t,t_i)\delta_k(t_i)$$
## Gaussians
### Gaussian Tails and MGF
A Random Variable $X \in \mathds{R} has a Gaussian Distribution iff it has a density p wiht respect to the Lebesgue measure on \mathds{R} given by:
$$P(x) = \frac{1}{{\sigma \sqrt {2\pi } }}e^{{{ - \left( {x - \mu } \right)^2 } \mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {{ - \left( {x - \mu } \right)^2 } {2\sigma ^2 }}} \right. \kern-\nulldelimiterspace} {2\sigma ^2 }}}$$ where $$\mu = E(X)$$ and $$\sigma^2 = var(X) > 0$$ are the mean and variance of $$X$$. We write $$X ~ N(\mu, \sigma^2)$$. 
Mills Inequality allows one to find the decay of the tail whereby:
$$P(X-\mu>t) \leq \frac{1}{{t\sqrt {2\pi } }}e^{{{ - \left( t } \right)^2 } \mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {{ - \left( {x - \mu } \right)^2 } {2\sigma ^2 }}} \right. \kern-\nulldelimiterspace} {2\sigma ^2 }}}$$ which allows one to find the probability of occurance given a t value.
That a Gaussian random variable Z has tails that decay to zero exponentially fast can be seen in the Moment Generating Function:
$$M : s -> M(S) = E[exp(sZ]$$
$$M(s) = E[exp(sZ)] = \frac{1}{{\sqrt {2\pi } }}e^{sz}e^{{{ - \left( z } \right)^2 } \mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {{ - \left( {x - \mu } \right)^2 } {2}}} \right. \kern-\nulldelimiterspace} {2 }}}$$
$$=e^{frac{s^2}{2}}$$
If $$X ~ N(\mu, \sigma^2)$$, then $$E[exp(sX]$$ = exp(s\mu+\frac{\sigma^2\s^2}{2}$$
#### Sub-gaussian RV's and Chernoff Bounds

#### Moments
#### Sums of indepdent sub-gaussian RV's
#### Hoeffding's Inequality
### Sub-exponential RV's
#### Bernstein's Inequality
### Maximal Inequalities

## Cosmology II: Gaussian Fields

-
### Code
Gadget-2 is software developed by Volker Springel at the Max Planck Institute in Munich, Germany. To set it up requires the following:

Along the way, I had trouble with the following errors. After being exposed to bash commands through my summer internship, setting up the right compilers and editing the paths proved a challenge and I learned how to work with Fortran/C++ based simulations. The next hurdle was establishing N-GenIC which required similar troubleshooting with the common error, for example, of "dr.fftw_mpi.h", which could be fixed after ensuring that FFTW has been re-downloaded, but more importantly, set up properly, by specifying the compiler such as clang or GNN. 
# Results
-
